README.adoc, before:

# Deploy Rudder Server via Ansible 

Ansible is a tool that automate software deployment and different system configurations tasks by writing playbooks in YAML format. In this context of Infrastructure as a code process, we would like to deploy Rudder Server and set up its main configuration parameters via Ansible playbooks and modules.

Synposis
~~~~~~~~

* The following documentation present a role to deploy Rudder Server which make:  

1. Installing Rudder Server in its 6.1 release.
2. Configuring Rudder settings via APIs Calls (Using a developed 'ruddersettings' module).
3. Configuring Rudder settings via Ansible modules for configuration file editing.

== Prerequisites
* In order to use the following scripts you're supposed to have Ansible installed on your machine which is the Ansible manager node.

* In addition, as required for Ansible, in order to run playbooks on remote nodes, ssh keys configuration must be set up between the manager node and the target machine. 

== Usage 

=== Introduction

* After preparing the required environment, you need to clone this repository on your Ansible manager machine.

* We will explain the utility of each of the following element in the repository. 
        
        . *inventory*: Contains Ansible target machine IP address which will basically supposed to be your Rudder Server machine.

        . *main_playbook.yml*: A playbook for executing the 'ansible-deploy-rudder' role to install Rudder Server latest release 6.1 and configure a few settings, either on Debian, RedHat or Suse distribution. 

        . *library*: This directory contains a module named 'rudder_settings' which will be used in one of Rudder configuration tasks, this module allows setting up some parameters using Rudder APIs calls.

        . *tasks*: This directory includes tasks for installing and configuring Rudder.

        . *defaults*: Contains variables used in Rudder installation tasks.

        . *meta* Contains metadata used to deploy the role in Ansible Galaxy.

=== Use case 

* First thing you may want to do is to go into `ansible-deploy-rudder` directory and change the inventory content to ansible target machine IP address which is supposed to be your Rudder Server.

* Specify the desired version of Rudder in *roles/ansible-deploy-rudder/defaults/main.yml* with `rudder_version: 6.1`.

* Then execute the `main_playbook.yml` using the following command:

----
ansible-playbook -i inventory main_playbook.yml
----

There's a few default configuration values defined in `tasks/configure.yml` file, which you can modify as well depending on your needs.

Commit message:

Fixes #18988: fix user creation via variables

README.adoc, after:

# Deploy Rudder Server via Ansible 

Ansible is a tool that automate software deployment and different system configurations tasks by writing playbooks in YAML format. In this context of Infrastructure as a code process, we would like to deploy Rudder Server and set up its main configuration parameters via Ansible playbooks and modules.

Synposis
~~~~~~~~

* The following documentation present a role to deploy Rudder Server which make:  

1. Installing Rudder Server in its 6.1 release.
2. Configuring Rudder settings via APIs Calls (Using a developed 'ruddersettings' module).
3. Configuring Rudder settings via Ansible modules for configuration file editing.

== Prerequisites
* In order to use the following scripts you're supposed to have Ansible installed on your machine which is the Ansible manager node.

* In addition, as required for Ansible, in order to run playbooks on remote nodes, ssh keys configuration must be set up between the manager node and the target machine. 

== Usage 

=== Introduction

* After preparing the required environment, you need to clone this repository on your Ansible manager machine.

* We will explain the utility of each of the following element in the repository. 
        
        . *inventory*: Contains Ansible target machine IP address which will basically supposed to be your Rudder Server machine.

        . *main_playbook.yml*: A playbook for executing the 'ansible-deploy-rudder' role to install Rudder Server latest release 6.1 and configure a few settings, either on Debian, RedHat or Suse distribution. 

        . *library*: This directory contains a module named 'rudder_settings' which will be used in one of Rudder configuration tasks, this module allows setting up some parameters using Rudder APIs calls.

        . *tasks*: This directory includes tasks for installing and configuring Rudder.

        . *vars*: This directory includes all variables necessary for the installation of Rudder (account creation, etc.)

        . *defaults*: Contains variables used in Rudder installation tasks.

        . *meta* Contains metadata used to deploy the role in Ansible Galaxy.

=== Use case 

* First thing you may want to do is to go into `ansible-deploy-rudder` directory and change the inventory content to ansible target machine IP address which is supposed to be your Rudder Server.

* Specify the desired version of Rudder in *roles/ansible-deploy-rudder/defaults/main.yml* with `rudder_version: 6.2`.

* Specify the desired credentials for the first connection to Rudder in *roles/ansible-deploy-rudder/vars/main.yml*. Here is an example of an account:


        rudder_username: admin
        rudder_password_hash_type: bcrypt
        rudder_password_hash: $2b$12$uU.LawnF2lLlD4mAZviRKeNEb2Z58asv2d5QoEwl7N71Frrt0laJC
        rudder_user_role: administrator



* Then execute the `main_playbook.yml` using the following command:


        ansible-playbook -i inventory main_playbook.yml


There's a few default configuration values defined in `tasks/configure.yml` file, which you can modify as well depending on your needs.
